This is side four. This is side four. This is side
four. Continuing the discussion of crossroads.
They plan to measure the immediate and long-range
effects of the burst upon fish population of
Bikini Atoll and the rate of repopulation through
reproduction and immigration of the fish
populations destroyed. Since early planning
indicated that the ecological phase of the future
study of Bikini Atoll and surrounding waters was
an important one, the primary responsibility for
the biological survey rested with the U.S.
National Museum. The plans for the biological
survey call for a quantitative inventory of flora
and fauna at Bikini at any weak dock which would
feel only moderate effects and at Rongerik not
likely to be affected at all. These inventories
were to be made prior to the burst as soon
afterwards as possible and at varying intervals
for a considerable period to estimate long period
effects and the rate of repopulation. Three
geologists from the geological survey were
specifically selected. to study bottom
sediments using both bottom sampling and
photographic methods, and to investigate the
physiography and geology of the islands of the
Bikini Atoll, the shore and beach processes, and
the ecology of the coral reefs. The purpose of the
geological investigation was to study possible
effects of the explosion, like erosion of the
interface of Bikini Island by waves and currents,
changes in bottom topography by transportation
of sediment near the explosion, and radioactive
effects on the bottom sediments in the coral reef.
On 11 March, the Bautist expedition composed of
these advanced study activities began their
scientific work in Bikini Lagoon.
In the latter part of December, wave measurements
were among the topics of discussion in a
conference called by the Bureau of Ordnance,
which was attended by Rail Admiral, then
Commodore Parsons, Rail Admiral Sahlberg, and
representatives of the Bureau of Ships of the
Manhattan District and the Los Alamos
Laboratories. The Alamos representatives
particularly emphasized the importance of wave
measurements and called upon Commander Revell to
describe the proposed methods of measurement,
which included portable echo sounders and
bottom-mounted echo sounders. Other work was
done under the following people. Suggestions for
wave measurement were received from Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution, the Admiralty
Research Laboratory in England, the University
of California Division of War Research, and the
U.S. Navy Electronics Laboratory. Suggestions
from Mr. M.P. O'Brien, Dean of the University of
California Department of Engineering, for full
for model studies of wave generation,
preliminary to the full-scale atomic studies,
was subsequently carried out by his personnel and
others. On page 383, photogrammetry and
television, we've mentioned some of this. The
head of the oceanography group recommended
photogrammetry for wave measurements by means of
simultaneous aerial and ground photography
controlled by radio links. for the installation
of camera towers on the Atoll Islands, as well as
television observations. A special section of
the group was organized for installing and
operating two television transmitters on
Bikini, two television receivers, and so forth.
The group also arranged that a series of model
tests be undertaken under the direction of
Professor J. W. Johnson of Dean O'Brien's staff.
The investigation was instituted at Woods Hole
Laboratories, transferred to the Navy Taylor
Model Base and finally to the Naval Warfare Mine
Test Station, Solomons, as the size of the charges
used in the investigation increased from one
tenth of a pound to a thousand pounds.
On page 396, it's worthwhile reading the
conclusions
as stated as follows. It seems that throughout the
ages, each new weapon has been heralded as ringing
the death knell of navies. Undoubtedly, this
vicious cycle commenced with the introduction of
cannons on galleys, which immediately outmoded
the ore-propelled ram and thereby ended the reign
of Sea Power. Whitehead's automotive torpedo
assuredly placed the naval vessel in the
proverbial mothballs. Sea Power then came to its
end when Mr. Holland perfected the submarine, and
again with the advent of the airplanes. but now it
appears sea power which somehow not only managed
to survive these other indefensible weapons but
also managed to increase its influence is doomed
once more. This time it is the atomic bomb that
sends the navies to their inglorious grave. The
student of history confesses that each new
development, improvement, or invention has not
diminished the naval vessel, but rather has
expanded its importance, if not by utilization of
that new invention to its own advantage, then by
the development of defensive equipment or
weapons which increased its power. Let us say, in
general conclusion, that Operation Crossroads
indicated that the destructive effect of the
atomic bomb is 20,000 times greater than any other
missile yet developed, which makes selectivity
of targets impossible since non-military items
will be destroyed just as surely as are the
military objectives, that it can sink the largest
ship afloat, and that the atomic bomb is a fact.
This conclusion, however, has merely pointed the
way for naval architects and strategists and
tacticians. As the advent of air power only aided
in making sea power stronger, so may this new
weapon of warfare merely make naval force more
effective. In page 396.
On page 473, chapter 25 of this book, what is past is
prologue. There's a summary that is worth reading
into the record here. To study the future, one must
first look to the past.
This history then is a prologue of the Bureau of
Ships, a record of wartime accomplishments
almost unequal in scope, integration, and
success of mission. According to the extensive
data presented in the preceding chapters, the
Bureau's functions in attaining these
accomplishments during the fiery months from 7
December 1941
to 14 August 1945 fell into the categories of
planning, production, and maintenance, which
may well be recapitulated briefly to describe the
background from which the future will emanate.
One element of planning involved the efficacious
allocation of over 20 billions of dollars during
the war period. This sum went into the purchase of
12 million tons of steel, an intake conservation
of critical materials program which saved 30
million pounds of nickel, 20 million pounds of
rubber, 9 million pounds of tin, 207 million
pounds of copper, and resulted in a considerable
financial economy. It went into wages for some one
million shipyard workers at the program's peak
load, with over two million industrial workers
being engaged in satellite industries at this
same moment. Two million dollars were used to
expand shipyards, and industrial plants to
accommodate this comprehensive shipbuilding
program involving over 40,000 contractors, and
sizable appropriations were made to the Bureau of
Ships' extensive training program, which
involved 2,000 military and 4,000 civilian
personnel, and to the elaborate design program
involving 161 different types of vessels.
Production was concerned with the construction
of 1,141 combatant vessels, 75,113
landing craft, 519 auxiliaries, which together
with other types totaled 98,131
vessels of 7,465,046 tonnage. produced during
the war years. In addition, 1,504 ships totaling
over four and one half million tons were
converted, while almost 1,200 ships of one third
million tonnage were acquired. Peak production
for one month was reached in May 1944, when 4,475
vessels and craft were constructed and 30 million
diesel horsepower were installed. Compare this
with the Navy on 7 December 1941, which included
only 4,000 ships with 16 million steam and diesel
horsepower. It is of interest to compare the
following figures showing the building periods
required for specific types of vessels.
According to the maximum period, the average
period, and the estimated average Japanese
period, a conservative estimate must be accepted
with reservation. Battleships maximum 46,
average 36, Japanese 48. Destroyers maximum 30,
average 12, Japanese 24. Submarines 27, average
11, Japanese 12. LST, maximum nine, average
three.
These must be months.
Electronics production proved almost as
spectacular with the manufacture of 35,617
radar, radio, and sound equipment during the war
years, plus 10,225 units for the Marine Corps.
Maintenance involved the production of varying
quantities of over 2,500,000 individual service
parts requiring 227 acres of warehousing.
Although repair and overhaul estimates are
impossible to bring under a common denominator,
it may be roughly estimated that over 20,000 ships
were serviced each year. Over 500 calls for
salvage were answered, resulting in the saving of
$700 million worth of shipping. Finally, the
vital and important post-war program includes
$20 million appropriate for the preservation of
the reserve fleet. The principal objective and
motivation for this study, however, is not to
eulogize the accomplishment of the personnel of
the Bureau, rather it is to gather up a summary of
past experience from which data may be drawn as a
basis in the formulation of future plans. It makes
several general considerations, which I need not
go into here, but are worth reading, and the book
itself is far from negligible, and I will repeat
its title. An administrative history of the
Bureau of Ships during World War II, Volume 4.
First draft narrative prepared by the historical
section of the Bureau of Ships. End of this book
report for the study at the first of this tape.
Stop.
After 1946,
I went to Scripps Institution of Oceanography on a
GI barrel and joined first class of physical
oceanography graduate students. And I obtained a
master's degree in 1948
along with such persons as Bob Reed, John Cochran,
Don Pritchard, Harry Carter, Dale Leper, in that
group, most of whom went on to get their doctorate
degrees.
I went to the Hydrographic Office and got a job
under Richard Fleming, R. H. Fleming, now retired
as Department Head of Oceanography at the
University of Seattle. Under him were a
remarkable group of people. When I got there, John
Lyman, now retired in Raleigh, North Carolina,
was the assistant head of the section. Under him
were Tommy Austin, Louie Allen, Charlie Bates,
Jim Hughes, Boyd Olsen, A.R. Gordon, who
graduated with me at Scripps, and others like Ben
Richman, Max McLean, Leighton Kohler, and many
others. It is rather remarkable that so far as I
know, Louie Allen, who passed away this past
summer, is the first of this group to die. He was the
well-known and beloved weather reporter for the
station, I believe it was the CBS station, in
Washington, D.C. but to his credit must be given
the first attempt for ship routing using
oceanographic and wave forecasts, a service
which was later taken over by the Hydrographic
Office itself. In the two to three years that I was
with the Hydrographic Office, the outstanding
accomplishment from my point of view was the
establishment of the first converted Navy ships
for oceanographic research, the San Pablo and
another APA converted aircraft carrier,
seaplane tender, a converted seaplane tender. It
was our job to outfit these vessels which Tommy
Austin then initiated as director of that group
the first cruises which carried on and later were
corroborated with the large multi-ship
operations. These were among the first ships to be
taken out of mothballs and put back into service
after World War II for ships of any size, and it was a
major effort between the Hydrographic Office and
the Bureau of Ships. I felt much more at home at the
Bureau of Ships, the Naval Oceanographic Office,
and transferred over about 1951 and was
immediately put in charge of taking care of the
funding for the contracts for Woods Hole and
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, working
under Meredith D. Williams, Dick Williams.
and Ned Shearer, who were in that department,
later succeeded by E. Vernon Potter, PhD, as the
oceanographic and scientific group in the sonar
design section of Old Butte Ships. There were
several important milestones to be considered
between 1952 and 1969,
which I consider to be the peak of the
oceanographic effort in the Navy.
The first was initiated by Gordon G. Lill, then
head of the funding section at the Office of Naval
Research, later succeeded by Arthur Maxwell,
in which he, together with Arthur Maxwell and
Phelan Jennings and Dick Vetter in that section,
initiated the Informal Coordinating Conference
of Oceanography, CCO. It soon became evident that
we would have to broaden the base between BUSHPS
and ONR, and the next people invited was Lionel K.
Walford of the Bureau of Fisheries of the
Department of Interior. This Informal
Coordinating Committee
of Oceanography
grew finally to have some 19 activities under its
scope. I think you will find it in Wink's book
called The Politics of the Ocean, how this
informal committee became important enough to
get official recognition and the Interagency
Committee on Oceanography was established,
which became quite powerful up to the time when
Wink became the secretary for the committee and
commission directed by Hubert Humphrey in the
latter days. Gordon Lill also developed the
informal social group known as the American
Miscellaneous Society, AMSOC, which originally
was purely for social purposes but was later taken
over as the activity that bid and helped design the
Project Moho. I believe Gordon Lill had left and
gone commercial for a while with the Submarine
Signal Company, and Arthur Maxwell, was head of
the department at ONR, where Phelan Jennings and
Dick Vetter and he and others decided there should
be a 10-year oceanographic plan. Eventually,
there were two such plans succeeding each other.
Due credit for the fact that the plan got off the
ground at all should be given to Gilbert Maton,
then with J.I. Thompson Company, who with his
skill took the various opinions of King Cooper,
Dick Better, Phelan Jennings and others and made a
comprehensive report as to what our plan should be
which was reasonable and which was the beginning
of what became rather widespread overall
planning for oceanography in the Navy program.
which of course has ballooned since up into great
organizations like NOAA. But in order to get
funding, they saw that such a plan would have to be
laid out and then approved by the then Assistant
Secretary of the Navy, Jim Wakelin, and others in
order to get going. It was very rough. but it was a
beginning and was a milestone in the organization
and planning for research and development in the
Navy in oceanography. But I return to the informal
coordinating committee on oceanography
established by Lill as the first establishment of
lines of communication between the different
government agencies and the interplay of their
work. such as on shipbuilding and ship
construction, which included the Maritime
Commission, the beginnings of the attempts to
have a list of oceanographic instrumentation and
some guidelines and standards for them, and
multiple problems and great activities aiming
for the same area.
The 1950s were interesting and exciting years.
There were enough old-timers left around in
places of importance in the Bureau of Ships to be
able to say, yes, we can do this. There were enough
people with technical know-how and confidence
based on the building of over a thousand ships and
all of its parts to be able to say, yes, this can be
done. And with enough imagination, and perhaps
also due to the boredom of peacetime operations, A
great deal of technical and managerial
assistance was given on any project that captured
their imagination. As one example, which came
later, after Bob Dietz had given such a favorable
report on Picard's Bathyscaphe, the Trieste, and
after O&R had bought it, and after O&R had made the
deep dive in the Marianas Trench with Don Walsh and
Pickard with Andy Rechnitzer and Shoemaker with
the other members of the team. The bathyscaphe was
turned over, Trieste was turned over to the Bureau
of Ships for future funding. It was too much, too
big an item out of ONR's then just growing budget to
be handled. And it was with surprise and delight
that a captain off the cuff, as it were, said we will
have $800,000 out of King's program for the
Trieste. As simple as that.
Furthermore, the contracting activities of the
Bureau of Ships were used to dealing in millions of
dollars and making decisions based on what they
considered adequate information. And although
in general principles the contractor with the
lowest bid was given most consideration, there
were certain areas in which the Bureau very wisely
permitted sole source procurement, that is,
procurement from a designated agent who was
qualified to give the answers that were needed. On
that basis, the Woods Holbrook was supported
directly for many years from Bureau ships, plus
O&R contracts also, but from the Bureau of Ships
contract at least, we could cite all the way back
the history of the development of the
bathymograph as the reason for sole source
procurement, in other words, buying the type of
research from them which we specified in their
program as approved and funded, to be funded for
the year. The same was true of Lamont, And Ewing's
work and the beautiful maps of Bruce Hazen were
always prime number one exhibits, long before the
Geographic brought them out, to show what we were
learning about the bottom of the ocean. The same
was true of Scripps, until Owen Awe took over the
majority of that contract. My particular effort,
which had some success, was the development of R&D
programs in oceanography in the Navy Control
Laboratories. It was always an interesting and
fascinating problem to find a research project
which fitted a particular man's capability in a
laboratory, as well as a laboratory mission, and
also in the development of oceanographic
research. Sometimes it was easy. Out at the Navy
Electronics Laboratory was a group interested in
Arctic research with submarines under Dr. Waldo
K. Lyon. And although we funded him many years for
studies of sea ice and all that sort of thing too, we
were always supported and delightfully
supported by certain areas in the Chief of Naval
Operations who knew, which we did not always know,
that Dr. Lyon and his group were really laying the
foundation for what later became the famous
Nautilus cruise and the cruise of the under-ice
submarines. But throughout all the years the
major justification was the improvement of
sonar, the lineal descendant of the original
studies of afternoon effect and the Bathley
thermograph, studies of internal waves, studies
of bottom topography, the original
installations of Ewing's three original SOFAR
stations for sound fixing and navigation, at
Point Arenas, I believe Point Sur, and Kaneohe, an
unclassified system that operated for a while
until the cables went out but proved the fact that
it could be done. This little project upon which so
much later work in the Navy hung should not be
forgotten because with it, after the system was
assessed, A small four-pound bomb of TNT
hydrostatically fused to go off at the sound
channel about 200 meters down or more could be
heard at the three stations and a fix made of where
it had occurred in the best portions of an ellipse
six miles by a mile and a half wide, which was a
pretty good location of any downed aircraft of
those days. Had this system been maintained, the
Navy could have saved far more than its original
cost as it searched for airplanes lost in the
Pacific. Even after the Port Arenas station went
out, the link between Point Sour and Kaneohe was
used for basic research in underwater sound for
many years. At the risk of repetition, I have now
found a part of an old speech which I want to read
into the record as it points up some of the persons
involved. These persons come under the names of
Master Planners. Jim Wakelin and the Assistant
Secretary of the Navy Establishment have already
mentioned it. And now repeating a little bit.
Master planners, the first one military man, for
all this began in 1941 and 42, the late Rosson
Bennett II, Railroad Mark, USN, one of MTS's first
directors, and the Coal Pitchers Committee, the
National Academy of Sciences, who said, go all out
for oceanography if you want to improve
underwater sound, so not performance. And
through Bennett and his group would channel the
funding and direction and and direction helped
and given to the National Defense Research
Committee. The fundings were in millions of
dollars.
From Woods Hole down to Washington came Columbus
Islin, who has been honored recently in many
speeches, and Morris Ewing. And from NIRL there
was help, and from Scripps came H. Hughes-Feldrup
and Walter Monk in the way of predictions. And
right into the middle bench group came Roger
Avell, You must see him with Marston Sargent as his
first assistant, and Mary Sears, Dr. Mary Sears,
now Woods Hole, who was then a wave out at the
hydrographic office. And among the planners must
be mentioned those starlets who emerged in the war
or planning in the Navy laboratories. Some have
left us, like it. Houghton and Guy Harris at New
London, and at San Diego, Dr. Christensen and Don
Wilson, and at Buschips, the original marine
physical laboratory at Point Loma, where we had a
series of powerful directors, Carl Eckert, Sir
Charles Wright, Al Folk, and now later Fred Spies.
Very few people know how much oceanography owes
Roger Revelle. Suffice it to say that he
implemented the contracts and was a prime mover in
establishing ONR and our international posture.
For 15 years, under one of his operational
requirements, placed on the Bureau of Ships and
ONR, one of the essential papers in the history of
oceanography in the Navy. laid on equally on BUSH
ships and ONR the job of continuing long-time
research. In fact, in nine short sentences, he
justified the Navy in doing any kind of work needed
for marine research through the war and in the
post-war years and later. An essential group in
oceanography at this time in the early 50s was the
Deepwater Propagation Committee back at Hersey
as chairman. It had no schedule. It was a smoke
filled room where review and decisions were made
and the work carried out under the ONR and BUSHIP's
contracts. At a typical meeting, say at Dobbs
Ferry, the host would be Bob Frosch for Hudson
Laboratories Al Berman, for Woods Hole, Al Vine,
for Lamont, Joe Wazell, for Underwater Sound Lab,
Guy Harris, for NEL, Gilbert Curl. Down to bishops
came Alan Vine from Woods Hole also, for many terms
of duty. In the 1950s, he joined Dick Williams,
Vernon Potter, and Ned Shear, all under a crusty,
fair-minded driver and assistant to Boston
Bennett named George Cummings. Over at ONR was
Gordon Lill and Art Maxwell, Don Martineau,
Phenon Jennings. Lill started the original
Coordinating Committee for Oceanography, which
became the Interagency Committee on
Oceanography with Bob Abel, and which had a
crucial part in the Stratton Report. Dick Vetter
left Lill's group at ONR to become secretary to
Harrison Brown's National Committee for
Oceanography. and kept it human with his reports
called NASCO Notes and Doodles. Please continue
on side five. Please continue.